I'm back with Rainer Pope, who is the
CEO of Maddock, which is a new AI chip
company. Last time we were talking about
what happens inside a data center. Now I
want to understand what happens inside
an AI chip. How does a chip actually
work? Full disclosure, by the way, I am
an angel investor in Maddock.
Um, so hopefully you have designed a
good chip.
>> [laughter]
>> So I'll start with uh, sort of the very
smallest fundamental unit of of of chip
design and we'll sort of build up into
what an overall um, like actual
production chip, uh, what are the
components of that? Yeah. At the very
bottom level of a chip, the primitives
that we work with are uh, logic gates,
um, which are very simple things like
and or not.
Um, and then these are connected
together by by wires that have to be
laid out uh, physically as metal traces
on a chip.
The main function that that AI chips
want to uh, compute is
uh, multiplication of matrices and
really inside that is the fundamental
primitive is multiply accumulator just
like of of pairs of numbers.
So we're going to uh, sort of
demonstrate what that calculation looks
like by hand. And then sort of infer
what what a uh, circuit would look like
for that.
It'll turn out to be sort of easiest if
if I do multiplication uh, accumulator
something like a um, a four-bit number
um, with another four-bit number. Um,
and then we're going to the the actual
clearest primitive is actually um,
multiply accumulate. So there's a
multiply
these two terms and then we're going to
add in
So, product of these two terms
and then we're going to add in an
eight-bit uh, number.
And then you can ask a clarifying
question. Why is this the um,
natural primitive for
um, you know, what what whatever
computation happens inside a computer?
Yeah. So um, the there's a few reasons
for this. Uh, it it's a little bit more
efficient, um, but the the reason it's
natural for AI chips is that if you look
what's happening during a matrix
multiply, the uh what is matrix
multiply? In very short, it is um
uh there's a for loop over I
and over J Yep. and over K
of
output
I K
plus equals to um input
I J
times
other input J K.
And so multiply accumulate happens at
every single step of of a matrix
multiply. Makes sense.
>> And then the other observation is that
um the precision will almost always be
higher in the accumulation step than in
the multiplication step. Um this is
maybe specific to AI chips, uh but
you're you're multiplying low precision
numbers, but then when you accumulate,
errors accumulate quickly and so you
need more precision here. So, this is
why we've chosen
>> to do a 4-bit multiplication and an
8-bit addition. Let me make sure I
understood that.
There's two ways to understand that. One
is that the value will be larger than
the inputs. And the other is that
if it was a floating-point number, it
would be
maybe that that part is like less
intuitive to me, but it's maybe the same
principle.
>> It It is really the same principle. Um I
guess the sort of I mean I guess the the
separate principle is that
as you are summing up this number, you
are summing up a whole bunch of numbers
and so you've got a lot of rounding
errors accumulating. Whereas in this
case, there's like there's there's only
one multiplication in that chain and so
there's not a lot of rounding errors
accumulating in the multiplication.
Why are you summing up a whole bunch of
numbers? There's just two numbers,
right?
>> Just I mean, the summation happens it's
repeated J J many times.
Any errors accumulate, I see. Yes, makes
sense. So, how would we perform this
calculation by hand? Um I mean, as a
human we would probably separate it into
two, but we can sort of do it all all in
one um
using long multiplication.
So, the multiplication term first, we're
going to multiply this number that this
4-bit number here
by every single bit position in the
other 4-bit number.
So, we write that out. Um
first 1001 multiplied by this bit
position.
Um
that is this number itself.
Then, shift it up across by one. We're
multiplying by zero. That gives us an
all zeros number.
Shifted uh across even one more to
multiply by this one.
We get 1001.
And then finally for this last last bit
position, we get an all zeros uh number
again.
So, this this sort of gives us a bunch
of terms that we're going to have to add
for the um for the multiplication. And
then
while we're doing that uh summation of
this, we might as well
add in the the the actual accumulator
term as well. So, we just copy that
directly across.
So, so this is the sum. It's a it's a
five-way sum that we're going to want to
compute.
So, firstly, what what logic gates did
it take us to even get to this
intermediate step?
We needed to uh produce all 16 of these
um partial products. Mhm.
How do I produce one of these partial
products? So, let's take this this
number one for example here.
It is one. So, what was it How do we
produce this number by multiplying this
number
by this one over here.
We can actually produce that by an AND
gate. This this number is one if both
this bit is one and this bit is one. If
either of them is zero, then the
multiplication of one times one of of
zero times anything is zero.
So, to produce all of this stuff, we
ended up consuming 16 and gates. Mhm.
Or in the general case, if I were doing
a like a
P bit multiply
times a Q
bit multiply
then this will be like P times Q many
hands.
Exactly.
Finally, I sum them.
Actually, most of the work is going to
happen in the summing.
Um and so let me describe uh
sort of the other logic gate that we use
here.
And is almost the simplest logic gate
that exists on a chip. It's it's it's
it's almost the smallest.
Um
At the other extreme, typically the very
largest logic gate that you'll use is
something called a full adder.
And what this does is sort of it does
like it coming from software, you might
think that a full adder it like adds
32-bit numbers together. Uh in this
case, it just adds three single-bit
numbers together.
And so you can think of it as like
adding zero, one, and one together.
Now, when I add this together, the
result can be zero, one, two, or three.
So, I can express that in binary using
just two bits. So, it it it as input it
has three bits and as output it has it
has two bits, which in this case are one
and like uh
the number two in binary is one zero.
So, so this is also known as a
three to two compressor.
Because it takes three bits of input and
produces two bits of output.
The two inputs are
an X and a Y value and then some carry
that would that came in from like the
sorry, the the the the three inputs are
um
all all bits that are in the same sort
of bit position, like three bits that
are in a column here. Yeah, yep. And
then the two outputs um
I I have sort of drawn them vertically
here and horizontally here to kind of
match this vertical versus horizontal
layout here, which is expressing that um
things that are in the same column are
in the same like bit position. Yeah.
Whereas things that are in adjacent
columns, like this is a carry out where
this was the sum. So, if the inputs in
the full adder are let's say like 101,
then the output will still be 10. If it
was 111, it'd be 11. If it was 000, it'd
be 00. If it was like 010, it'd still be
01. So, yeah, it's just counting
essentially the number of the number of
things in each expressing that in
binary.
So, this circuit actually can sort of
capture what we as humans naturally do
when when we're when we're doing summing
along the column.
So, I can show that sort of I'll show
you sort of one iteration of using the
full adder to sum.
The way I sum here is going to be a
little bit unnatural for humans. Humans,
we would sort of sum along the column
and then remember the carry.
But
instead of remembering the carry, we'll
actually just explicitly write it out.
So, in this we proceed from the
rightmost column towards the left. On
the rightmost column, we sum the one and
the one.
And that produces like a
a zero here and a carry of one.
So, we've we've sort of used a
this full adder circuit on this pair of
bits and produced a pair of bits as
output.
Now, we can do the same thing with this
column. We've got a column of 1 2 3 4
numbers. And so, maybe we'll like take
the first three of them.
Um
run a full adder on them and that gives
us a zero and a zero as output. Um so,
it's like the sum of these is is 00. And
so, that's the full compressor
full full adder applied to all of these
bits. As I've used up bits, I'm going to
sort of just cross them out to indicate
that I've I've I've handled them.
Let's just keep going a little bit more.
So, we we'll we'll go here.
I take these three numbers. I add them.
That gives me
a a one and a zero.
I've dealt with these three numbers.
And now I take one, two, and I can even
take these three numbers for example
right now and add them and that gives me
a a one and a zero and I've dealt with
these numbers.
So,
I can sort of like the way I should view
this is that I have this whole grid of
numbers that need to be added. I'm going
to just keep applying full adders to all
the bits that are here, constantly
removing three numbers from a column and
then writing out two numbers as output.
Keep going with this over and over and
over again until I eventually get like
some just one single number coming out
here.
Um,
something like that.
This is probably the wrong sum.
So, so this approach that I've described
here, this is called a
um, data
multiplier.
Um,
and this is sort of like the standard
for how how you do
area efficient multipliers using full
adders.
Let's try and quantify the circuit size
of this just so we have got a a sense of
like how big things are that so we can
compare to them later.
How many full adders do I did I use?
I started with how many numbers? I have
the 16
partial products, which is the product
of all of these terms with all of these
terms.
Plus the eight
um, terms that I'm adding here. So, I I
started off with 24 bits.
And then on I produced eight bits on the
output eventually.
And in every step, I was sort of
crossing off three numbers and writing
two numbers out as a result. And so,
every single use of a full adder
eliminates one of the bits here.
Mhm. And so, how many full adders it
must be the 24 minus the eight. So, that
there were 16 full adders in in this
circuit.
In general, this is true in the general
case as well. There will be P * Q many
full adders Uh,
in this circuit. I'm just trying to
understand the logic of that. So,
the input bits 24 is
P * Q
+ P + Q. That's right. And the output
bits is
just
P + Q.
And so, P * Q + P + Q
P + Q = P * Q. That's right.
So, I think this explains sort of or at
least hints that the second reason why
we chose to do a
multiply accumulate.
First reason being that's actually what
shows up in matrix matrix
multiplication, but second reason being
it gave us this very slick
P * Q very simple algebra. Mhm.
So, we've sort of described like this
this whole procedure every single atomic
step that I took here becomes a logic
gate and then sort of the wires
connected together. Like when I had
these three inputs that that I summoned
to produce these two outputs, like if I
think of mapping this to a physical
device, there would be a wire that runs
sort of connecting all three of these
things together into a logic gate that
produced this output.
Okay. So, this is the the main primitive
at different bit widths
that that is that is inside an AI chip.
We're going to build up from here to how
would you use that to run all of the
other operations you want? This may be
the wrong time to ask this question, but
whenever Nvidia reports that this chip
can do X many FP4
or half as many FP8,
it seems to imply that those circuits
are fungible.
That there's not as dedicated like FP4
versus FP8,
but the way you're you're mapping it out
here it seems like you would need
if it has to be mapped out in the logic,
you would need a dedicated
FP4 multiply accumulate and then a
dedicated FP8 accumulate?
Basically, can you can you fund them? As
drawn, they're they're actually not
particularly fungible. Um This is
actually one of the main choices you
have to make when designing a chip,
which is how much of FP4, how much of
FP8 do I have? And then that sometimes
I'll make that consideration from the
point of view of like uh what do I think
that is the customer requirement?
Another way to take an angle on that is
to say um what is the what is the power
budget for uh equalize the power budget
between FP4 and FP8. But so then when
they report those numbers and they just
happen to be the case that like it does
2x as many FP4 as FP8,
they just happen to choose like give um
equivalent die areas to all the floating
points and as a result that ended up
being
Like why is the ratio exactly 2x?
>> yeah, exactly.
>> Yeah. So um part of it is I mean the the
surely that wouldn't be exactly like
exactly equivalent to die area. Um
There's uh there's a data movement
reason actually and we'll maybe come
back to this when we sort of look
through how it goes into and out of
memories. Um there's something really
nice just from a software level of the
fact that I can pack two four-bit
numbers into into the same storage as an
eight-bit number. And so when I store
that to a memory or something like that
uh it's the the sizing of the um the
buses that I wire within the chip um
actually makes that work out really
really nicely. Actually come to think of
it, it's not just 2x, it would be
uh the the amount of area it takes it
sounds like is
um quadratic.
>> It's quadratic in fact. Yeah.
>> with the with the bit length. So uh
that's why a smaller precision is like
even more favorable than you would have
expected.
>> a really big reason. So um in fact,
Nvidia made a change um historically uh
up until B100 or B200, every time you
have the bit precision, you you double
the um the flop count. Um that ratio is
exactly like for the reason you said,
because of this quadratic scaling, that
ratio is actually slightly wrong. Um it
should be like an even bigger you should
get an even bigger speed up than than
you than you might otherwise think. Um,
Nvidia's like product specs have sort of
started acknowledging that in B3 100 and
beyond where the FP4 is three times
faster than the FP8. Though it should be
4x.
Yeah, what I've shown here is like the
simplest case of integer multiply. When
you're when you're dealing with floating
point as you do in FP4 and FP8, um,
there's this sort of other term which is
the the the exponent that just
complicates this this calculation. So so
what can we see already from this? It's
like I think the the big observation
you've made is that there's this
quadratic scaling with bit width, um,
which which is like very effective and
and is the single reason why um, low
precision arithmetic has worked so well
for neural nets.
Um, but the other thing we're going to
do now is we're going to compare sort of
the area spent on the multiplication
itself with all of the circuitry that is
around it.
So,
we'll we'll walk back in time a little
bit and and see how did GPUs prior to
Tensor Cores work? Um, as which is the
same way as the way that CPUs worked in
fact. Mhm. So which is like where do we
stick this multiply accumulate unit? So,
generically I'll just describe like a
CUDA core or a CPU. You'll have some
register file
which stores some number of entries.
Maybe maybe it's like eight um, eight
entries. Um,
uh, of
of like
in this case I guess four-bit numbers
but typically like 32-bit numbers or
something like that of uh, which are not
numbers. Um, so this is the like
inside the CUDA core I'll have some
register file of some depth.
And then I will have my multiply
accumulate circuit multiply
uh, and accumulate circuit.
And what it's going to do it's going to
like it's going to take three arbitrary
registers from this register file
perform the multiply accumulate and then
write back to the register file.
So, it's going to maybe write to this
one, but it it was able to read from
this one.
This one and and another random one. So,
it'll take three inputs like this.
So, this is the core data path of of
many processors. Most processors look
like this. You've got some set of
registers and then you've got some set
of
logic units or ALUs.
We want to analyze the cost of the data
movement from the register file to to
the ALU and back.
So,
ultimately there's going to be some
circuit that says, "Well, I I don't
always have to select this guy. I might
select any of the registers in it in any
point in time." And so, sort of a first
question is how can I build a circuit?
The circuit that I'm going to look for
is
is a mux. So,
in this case it's going to have eight
inputs, one from each entry of the
register file,
and it's going to have one output, which
is actually
um
producing this output.
And then like what is the cost of this
thing? It's it's like all we have to to
build it out of is and and or.
Uh and so, how do we build it? We
we do the dumbest thing possible. We
like form a mask saying we okay, when we
want to read like the third entry,
um
we're going to and every single entry
with either one or zero based on whether
that's what we want to read and then
we're going to or all of them together.
Okay, just to make sure I understand the
basics. What the mux is doing is it's
just like selecting. Just selecting.
Just selecting an input. Yeah. So, like
invisible to software is like you say I
want input number three, that means
there's a mux here. And so, like what is
the cost of this mux? So, an n input mux
uh operating on P bits.
Well, I'm going to
So, I have N N rows, that's this eight
rows, and I've got uh, like each row is
P bits wide. Well, I have to AND every
single bit. So, I get N * P many AND
gates.
Every single input I have to say, am I
going to like mask it out or not? Um,
and then and then I'm going to OR them
all together. And so,
uh, there's going to be like
N - 1 * P many OR gates.
Which is saying, uh, I've got all of
these different things. Almost all of
them are zeros, but I need to sort of
collapse them down into into like from
my eight options down into one option.
And so,
every step I need to OR like one row
into into an existing row. Got it. Yeah.
It's actually kind of funny that you
would sort of um,
you don't think at the level of
hardware.
You sort of just think like, oh, I'll
just select element three, and something
as simple as that is
uh,
a sort of like in and of itself a quite
complicated circuit. Yeah. I mean, this
is the first step of all of the hidden
data movement costs that that shop.
Yeah, yeah.
Um, and so, like the thing like we're
we're just going to like compare like I
have to pay this cost, and I've got one
mux here, and then in fact I have two
more copies of that for each of the
three inputs to my multiply accumulate
operation. And so, I have this cost
which is like like 3 * N * P AND gates
over here.
Um, compared to this P * Q um,
like uh, sort of gates in the actual
circuit that I that is doing the thing I
care about.
And if we plug in actual numbers like
this N being eight, um, like I get like
* P
gates over just just in the data
movement compared to like if Q is four,
like 4 * P gates just in the in in the
adder uh, multiply adder. And sorry,
where is the three coming from?
Three different inputs here.
Got it. Okay.
So, the case I like really just what I'm
hinting at here is that like
all of this work which scales like as as
the size of the register file, and this
is a very small register file, all of
this work just moving the data from the
register file
to the to the to the logic unit um
is many many times more expensive than a
logic unit.
In the most recent Cloud Spectator 7
analysis ranked almost 100 different GPU
clouds. Crusoe was one of only five that
made the gold tier. 7 analysis found
that gold tier providers like Crusoe had
a total cost of ownership that was 5 to
15% lower than silver tier ones. Even
when they had identical GPU pricing.
This makes sense because total cost of
ownership is downstream of a bunch of
different things that don't necessarily
show up in the sticker price, but that
Crusoe has optimized. Things like
[music] how well you detect faults and
how quickly you replace failed nodes.
For example, Crusoe was one of the first
clouds to adopt NV Sentinel, [music]
Nvidia's own GPU monitoring and
self-healing software for enhanced GPU
uptime, utilization, and reliability.
This is Crusoe makes use of everything
that Nvidia has learned about why chips
fail across all their different fleets
and deployments so that Crusoe can catch
faults earlier in the process. And once
they identify a failure, Crusoe can swap
in a healthy node in less than [music]
10 minutes. Because they're not running
bare metal, Crusoe doesn't have to spend
time installing an operating system or
configuring drivers. They can just spin
up a new VM on an already running and
pre-qualified host. If you want to learn
more about this or the other reasons
that Crusoe made gold tier, go to
crusoe.ai/dwarfcash.
It may be helpful to just see what a mux
looks like, maybe like a two-bit or a
four-bit mux. Yeah, great.
So, we'll take some inputs. We'll we'll
have maybe um
like we'll just do a a two-way mux. So,
we've got um two different numbers
um
Uh we've got these two inputs.
And then we have a
um so the are the inputs
um um
that are being selected between and then
we have a selector.
Which says which can either be like
I want this one
or
or it could be I want the other one. So
this is a one-hot encoding.
Um so so this is what we all start with.
And then we The output we want to
produce like let let's focus on this
case. So so this is the actual input we
got.
>> Yeah. Um
we just want to produce this guy as as
the result. Um and so like sort of very
laboriously what we do is we and this
bit with all of these and so
um
that produces like ending this bit with
this row and likewise we end this bit
with this row that produces all zeros.
So this was the
there's four ANDs here.
There's four ANDs here.
And then finally we just OR these two
together. This gives a one. We OR these
two together. This gives a one. We OR
these two together gives a zero. We OR
these two together and gives a one.
And so this is the four ORs.
So like this actually ends up looking a
little bit like addition in fact like we
we did exactly the set of same same set
of ANDs here.
Um so if we've added all of these things
together but then instead of
collapsing it by using these full adder
circuits we just could get a very simple
collapsing with OR gates.
And how but that I guess that doesn't
look like N times P. Um so so yeah so
this was this was with um N equals two
um inputs.
>> Uh right.
Um in the general case we will have
um
N
uh
like and so this this is N rows um and
then we'll have uh P bits um
uh per row. Um so, that gives us the
um the N by N times P many AND gates.
So, this circuit I've described here
almost all of the cost, like uh
7/8 of the cost uh is in the reading and
writing the register file. And only a
tiny fraction of the cost is in the
logic unit itself. So, this is the
problem to solve. Um this this
essentially was the the state of play um
prior to the Volta generation of Nvidia
GPUs. This is what what this kind of
thing is what was inside the CUDA cores.
Um and this and this sort of problem
statement is uh what motivated
introduction of Tensor cores, which are
more generically called systolic arrays.
>> Mhm. So, if we think about how we're
going to solve this problem, like we
we're spending almost all of our circuit
area on something that we just really
don't care about and is and is like
hidden to the software programmer and
and the thing that we actually care
about is is is not much of the area. Um
well, make this one bigger somehow while
while keeping this at the same size.
That's the goal.
So,
so the evolution was like uh we had
baked this much into hardware um uh in
this stage that this single line is a
multiply accumulate um and this was this
single thing was baked into hardware. Um
the idea of a systolic array is to sort
of go two levels of loop up and uh and
and bake uh this entire loop out here in
into hardware. And so, the idea being
that if we have a much bigger
granularity fixed function piece of
logic, um
maybe the taxes we pay on the input and
output are much smaller.
It sounds like you're suggesting that if
you have um
if you go up one step in the
uh
in the matrix multiply loop, that
there's some you you can tilt the
balance more towards compute than
communication. That's right. Sort of
there's two effects that we're going to
take advantage of here. One is just that
we can do more stuff before per every
trip through a register file.
>> Mhm. Um and then the other thing we're
going to take advantage of is in fact um
in in in some of this loop we can take
advantage of for example
uh some certain things staying fixed.
So uh let's sort of visually we're going
to look at this matrix multiplication.
So so this portion of the loop
corresponds to a matrix vector
multiplication in fact. So we'll we'll
take a matrix um
and multiply it by
uh a vector.
So how do we do this? We take every
column gets multiplied by the vector and
then summed. So we're going to sum sort
of along columns. Um and so this zero
and three gets multiplied by the three
and seven and gets summed.
And then the one and two gets multiplied
by the three and seven and gets summed.
So there is a multiply accumulate
associated with every single one of
these
um entries in the matrix. So we'll just
draw out these four multiply
accumulates.
I just want to make sure I understand
why there's four multiply accumulates.
So
if each entry in the
uh column that corresponds to the output
vector
is
uh
a dot product and in this case it'll be
like
two multiplications and then the
addition of these two multiplications.
So like you're accumulating Yeah, so the
addition so really there's only one
addition in per dot product but like
when do we like to start with the
initialization
>> the the what we're going to aim for is
Yeah, so the the what we're going to aim
for is to have
So we've got a we want to have
quadratically more compute. We do. We
have We've got sort of
x times y
as much compute
as as we had before.
Um
Um but we're going to want to somehow
aim for having only x times as much um
uh, communication.
And And this is sort of the the
intention so that we get this, uh,
advantage, uh, term going as Y.
So, we've laid down the multiplications.
Bringing in like, we're going to want to
bring in a vector of size
two. And so, that's sort of already is
in line with our columns target. That's
fine.
However, we need to somehow manage the
communication of this matrix which which
which does which exceeds our budget of
X.
And so, uh, the idea is that
in the in an AI context, this this
matrix is actually going to stay fixed
for a long period of time. And so,
instead of like bringing it in from the
outside, so we've got the some register
file sitting over here, we
we don't want to have like the amount of
stuff coming out of this register file.
This is the term that we want to go, uh,
sort of as as X in some sense.
Um,
we don't want to bring this full matrix
in from the register file every every
cycle because we don't have enough, um,
that would cost too much in in terms of
wiring from the register file.
And so, instead we're going to store,
um, our key trick is that this matrix
can be stored locally,
uh, to the systolic array.
And so,
um,
where
we'll store these numbers zero, one,
two,
and three.
In in just like a gate called a register
that like
physically stores these numbers and
we're going to reuse these numbers, uh,
over and over again for for a large
number of different different vectors.
>> And so, the optimization here is that
like the nature of matrix multiplication
is you can store this like
uh, square quadratic thing
directly where the logic is happening.
Mhm.
Um,
and which is like higher dimension than
the
uh, Uh, or has an extra dimension
compared to the inputs which you keep
swapping in and out. That's right. I
mean, this is the nature of what a
matrix multiplication is, is that you do
uh, a lot of multiplication to get one
value out. Like a dot product is a the
result of a lot of multiplications, and
so that optimization means that you
you're just like you can stuff a lot of
like multiplication in before you get
some value out of it.
>> That's right. That's right.
>> Yeah. So, like just to complete the
picture here of of concretely how that
looks, um,
uh, I I swapped the between the two
here. Um, three and two. Um,
so just like
this zero and three is going to multiply
by the three and seven, and so, um,
uh, we're going to form a dot product
sort of along columns here.
So,
somehow we're going to feed a three and
a seven in here.
These participate in sort of this feeds
into this multiplication, and also feeds
into this multiplication.
Likewise, the three feeds into here, and
also into here.
And then we're going to sum
uh,
sort of
along here with like starting at the top
of a column we feed in zeros, and then
coming out the bottom, uh, we get
results coming out. So, sort of just to
visually see what we've got, um, there
is a dot product that is performed along
columns in a matrix, and that that sort
of maps exactly to what is done
spatially in the systolic array here.
Um, so this is one dot product summed
vertically, and this is a second dot
product also summed vertically.
Um, and then what is the data that needs
to go into and out of the register file?
We have
X amount of data that's coming out here
on the output.
Um, and we also have sort of
uh,
this data
coming from the input, X amount of data
from the input. Um, and so, with respect
to the input and output vectors at
least, um, we we sort of met our goal of
having only X as as much data going in
and out of the
um
uh the register file.
This leaves open the question of like I
said that the the weight matrices weight
matrix is stored locally in the systolic
array. How did it get there in the first
place?
Um is sort of a like at some point you
need to boot your chip and populate this
data and so where did that come from?
The trick is just we just do it very
slowly. So we we are very slowly trickle
feed it in into the systolic array. The
um sort of the simplest strategy is that
we we sort of run this daisy chain that
says like feed a number into here and
then and then on the next clock cycle
it'll move down to the next entry of the
systolic array. And so we can do that in
every
um in in every column in parallel and
that gives us um sort of
uh this is also going to come from here
and this is going to be another factor
of approximately X units of of bandwidth
coming in.
Uh you can can you just would you mind
repeating that sentence one more time?
So like we're sort of like we know that
we're going to be bringing in uh numbers
only rarely into the matrix. Yeah. Um
and so
we just want to come up with any
construction at all such that the amount
of wiring that actually feeds into sort
of crosses this boundary of the systolic
array like this boundary right here. We
just want to keep that bounded to X and
not be not go as X Y. And so a
particularly simple strategy is that we
um
we sort of bring in a a number into the
top row of the systolic array. That's
what we can do in one clock cycle and
then
for like uh for Y consecutive clock
cycles we're going to be bringing in the
top row every time and then sort of
shift all of the other rows down by one.
And that keeps the the sort of the
wiring that needs to come from this
expensive register file uh only down to
a factor of X rather than X
>> I see. Okay. So uh there's two questions
in terms of communication. There's like
communication time and then there's
communication bandwidth. Yes.
>> And you're saying, since we're only
going to be loading this in once, let's
maximize let's minimize bandwidth cuz
bandwidth equals diarrhea, Mhm. and
let's just like load it in slowly over
like smaller lanes cuz we're just going
to keep this value in there for a while.
>> Exactly. Exactly. Interesting. So, it's
interesting to me that when we were
talking last time about inference across
many chips, the big high-level thing
we're trying to optimize for is increase
the amount of compute Mhm. per memory
bandwidth, that is to say per
communication. And here also we're
trying to increase the amount of like uh
actual multiplies or actual additions
relative to transporting um information
from registers to uh the logic. So, in
both cases you're trying to maximize
compute relative to communication. Yeah.
Um this this shows up sort of all the
way up and down the stack. Um this is
sort of close to the bottom, um sort of
like into to the gates. Um there's sort
of a a version that's made even closer
to the gates of just like um even the
precision of number format that you
choose to use. Um
we saw that same effect. Uh there's like
a square-cube law or a like squared
versus linear term going on both in just
purely the precision of this um ALU, but
then also in in terms of the size of
this the the matrix. Yeah.
Interesting. So, um so this unit is sort
of the next bigger unit. We had like the
multiplication the circuit, and then uh
on top of that we have um a like a
pretty large array. I drew it as 2 by 2,
but in like um for example, older TPUs
they would describe it as 128 by 128 uh
of of this circuit uh shown here. Um and
this circuit ends up being um this is
the the most efficient known um
mechanism for uh
circuit [clears throat] for implementing
a matrix multiply.
>> I see. So, we we've talked about um sort
of
it seems obvious that you should try to
maximize compute relative to
communication. Um,
what are non-obvious tradeoffs that
um
actually you are you know, keep you up
at night about what should we do X or
should we do Y and it's non-obvious what
the answer is. Yeah. So, I mean, I think
most of the decisions in chip design are
um sizing decisions. Mhm. And so,
uh already in what we've drawn so far,
um
like so
AI chips all have this this circuit, you
know, they have a a systolic array and
then somewhere near it a register file
uh providing inputs and outputs.
Um
the two sort of
uh
like even within this scope sizing
questions that you have are how big
should I make my systolic array and how
big should I make the
um the the register file?
The
um so and and then the tradeoff for the
size of this
size of the systolic array, actually
these two questions are coupled, is
um
one way to think of it is to say, I'm
going to like have a budget for um
uh how much what percentage of my chip
area I want to spend on data movement.
So, maybe I just say that I want this to
be 10% and the systolic array to be 90%.
Um and then sort of I can size my
register file. Bigger register files are
more flexible. I they allow me to run
sort of more I can get more application
level performance out. Um
but
uh but then they sort of take away from
this area spent on the systolic array.
>> Yeah, makes sense. I recently ran an
essay contest where I asked people to
write about what I consider to be some
of the biggest open questions about AI.
The submission window closed last week,
so I used Cursor to create a couple of
different interfaces to help me review
the entries. One interface anonymizes
submissions and hides unnecessary
information. It lets me group responses
by question, add notes, and record my
scores. The other interface helps me
review entrants who also want to be
considered for the researcher role that
I'm hiring for. The UI puts the
applicant's essay right next to the
resume and their personal website so
that I can see everything at once.
Cursor's harness is really good at
helping these models see and improve
their UIs. I watched it render these
interfaces in the built-in browser, take
screenshots, click through sections, and
keep iterating. At this point, Cursor is
where I do most of my work. Whether I'm
reading and visualizing a bunch of
research papers, or coding up an
interface to review applications, or
making flash cards for my Blackboard
lectures, Cursor just makes it very easy
for an AI to look at whatever I'm
looking at and help me understand it and
work with me on it. So, whatever you're
working on, you should do it in Cursor.
[music] Go to cursor.com/dwarkesh.
Where does the clock cycle of a chip
come in? What what determines
what that is?
Yeah. And what is a clock cycle of a
chip? So, I guess at at baseline, it's
it's sort of worth observing that chips
are incredibly incredibly parallel,
right? You've got a hundred billion
transistors in a chip.
A key thing that you need to do whenever
you have like massive parallelism is you
need to synchronize between the
different parallel units.
In software, typically you like you you
have these very expensive
synchronization methods like a mutex.
So, one thread will finish what it's
doing, it will in like it will
grab a lock somewhere stored in memory
and then notify the other thread that
it's done.
Um
on chips, we take a very different
approach and say that uh
uh
every like nanosecond or so, um all
all circuitry in the chip will kind of
pause for a moment and then and then
synchronize every So, it actually
synchronizes every single nanosecond or
so. And so, that is the clock cycle.
Mhm. Um the entire chip, typically all
in sort of one fell swoop, um goes in
lockstep to the next operation that
happens.
And so, what this looks like in
circuitry is that
um
you will have
it's typically drawn so, the clock is
sort of mediated by registers, which are
these storage devices that we've drawn
elsewhere.
Um and the way to think of it is that I
have I have some storage uh which is
storing like a bit, which might be zero
or one.
And then I have some sort of cloud of
logic, which maybe is like
this systolic array or this multiplier
or something like that.
Um
and then I've got some and that's going
to produce some output. So, my inputs
I've got a bunch of inputs feeding to
this cloud of logic. And then eventually
later there's going to be some output
register that this writes to.
There is a global clock signal
which drives all of these registers.
And it says
at a certain instance in time when the
clock uh
uh strikes um
uh whatever value happens to be on this
wire at that instant, that's what's
going to get stored in there.
And so, the
the sort of the challenge here is like I
I would like to have my clock speed run
as fast as possible because if I can run
at 2 GHz, I can get twice as many
operations done per per per second than
if I run at 1 GHz.
Um
but what that ends up meaning is that uh
I'm very sensitive to the delay through
this cloud of logic because uh
any computation that is going to happen
in here needs to sort of finish before
the next clock cycle hits.
>> Right.
So,
uh a major point of sort of optimization
on on any chip then is is to make is to
sort of make uh this delay um
delay from here
uh
uh as short as possible. Interesting.
And um
is there ever because the constraint
here seems to be that if you
add
too much logic, then you might risk
missing the clock cycle. But if you
don't add enough, then you're you know,
leaving potential compute on the table.
Um is there ever a situation where
you're like you'd
take a probabilistic chance that like a
compute competition finishes and
or is it just like no either it's going
to finish by clock cycle or not? Yeah.
In standard chip design you you imagine
it such that I mean there is a
probability but it's like many many
standard deviations like way standard
deviations out such that for all
intensive purposes it is a reliable
part. It will it will always meet the
clock.
Um
there are some weird exceptions to that.
There are clock domain crossings where
you go from one clock to the other clock
and then you actually do have to reason
about this probability but
>> Interesting.
Uh in the main path uh you just like you
imagine it such that you'll get there
like
25% of the clock cycle in advance um
uh so that it's very unlikely that
>> And in this in this um
the clock
uh
where the uh clock synchronize I guess
where the registers are this is not
something you determine as a chip
designer. This is sort of just like an
artifact of hey I want whatever sequence
of logic and then the software you use
to convert your Verilog into the thing
you send to TSMC that just determines
like hey in order to make this work
you're going to kind of you got to put a
register here here and here to make sure
that there's a there's no one step that
is like too long such that it makes the
whole clock cycle of the entire chip
longer than it has to be. Yeah. So this
is actually a huge part of the work of
of designing a chip actually is is is
inserting them. So it is done in a
combination of manually and
automatically. Um so I mean like just
like to show the very sort of dumb uh
version of like what you can do here you
can take this logic and split it in half
and so like say actually instead of just
one uh cloud of logic I'm going to um
have two smaller clouds of logic um
which do the same thing but split them
up by a register.
Right. Um feeding in like this.
Um, and this is like
like if you split it like in the middle,
you can hit twice the clock frequency.
That's great. You get twice the
performance um, at the cost of this
extra register. And so, at the cost of
some more uh, storage. And so, stepping
back, why do we need to synchronize the
whole chip? Like if you have like if you
imagine playing Factorio or something,
there's no like global clock cycle. It
just should is done when it's done.
There's iron on the plate. You can take
it if you want. Yeah. So, uh
taking that analogy, um, the the the the
thing that you need to be mindful of is
if I've got two different paths through
some logic. So, I have to do a
computation like F here. Um, and then
computation G here. Um, and then they're
going to come and meet for computation H
somewhere here.
>> Yeah.
Um
and so
uh
there's going to be manufacturing
variance here. Uh, in some chips F will
take a little longer, maybe in some
chips G will take a bit a little bit
longer. And so, if I've got some signal
that's propagating through here, um
and the results from F and G have to
sort of meet up at H. Um what can the
the thing that can go wrong is that F
can get there early and it meets like
the previous value of G or the next
value of G or something like that.
>> And H needs to know when to start.
Exactly. Like when when has this next
iteration of
And so, this explains why
different chips made at the same process
node, the same like TSMC uh,
the the technology um can have different
clock cycles. Like
two chips made at three nanometer might
have different clock cycles based on
uh, whether they were able to optimize
making sure that like there's no one
critical path that is so long that um it
slows down the whole chip's clock cycle.
That's right. This optimization that I
that I showed here, this is just the uh,
this is sort of um pipeline register
insertion it's called.
>> Yeah. Um, we've inserted it in the
middle of the pipeline or register here.
Um, this is a sort of pure trade-off
between clock speed and an area. Yeah.
Um,
this is the easy case.
There is a harder case, too, which is
um,
uh, sort of I've drawn it as a pipeline
of logic here, but in in other cases,
you may have some, uh,
uh, some calculation which actually
feeds back in on itself. So, uh, it runs
some function F and then writes back to,
uh, itself like this.
So, for example, this might be this
addition, like you've got some number
that you're adding to into every clock
cycle, um, and so this this could be
like a, um, this could be like plus, uh,
where adding in some number every clock
cycle.
Mhm. So, this like this little circuit,
uh,
um, it it essentially it's just going to
sum all of the numbers that get
presented on on different clock cycles.
And the challenge is, if this plus takes
too long,
what can I do? If I like split it in if
I try and put a pipeline register like
right in the middle of it,
um, like like here in the middle of it,
um,
this will end up changing the
computation that's done. Instead of
forming a running sum of everything that
comes here,
I will actually have two different run-
running sums. I'll end up having a
running sum of the even numbers and a
running sum of the odd numbers.
So, sort of this constraint where I
have, um, a loop in my logic which all
chips have somewhere, um, this is
actually the thing that is the hardest
thing to to to address and and sets the
clock cycle.
I don't understand why it'd be a problem
to have that or I'm not sure even what
it would mean to have a register there.
Like cuz it's is it sort of, uh, atomic
operation, right? Yeah, well, so plus is
not really atomic. Uh, like I think, um,
As you just demonstrated.
>> Yeah, yeah, it took a whole lot of work
to do a summation. And so, like you can
take the early parts of that work and
then and then stick a register in the
middle and then do take the late parts
of that work. Got it. Okay. Yeah. Uh,
and I guess it's then up to so TSMC
offers a, uh, PDK which sets size, hey,
here's the primitives of,
um,
logic that we can grant you in the in
the chip, and it's up to them to
determine that no no primitive is bigger
than like the clock cycle they're hoping
a process node targets. But, other than
that, is there like what further
optimize Can't you just say like, "Hey,
here's all the primitives from TSMC,
and
if
keep adding registers in between the
primitives as much as is needed until
you get to your desired clock cycle?"
Yeah, as a logic designer, like the chip
architect set the clock cycle. So, just
for for one example,
the primitives you get from TSMC are on
the order of like AND gates or full
adders.
>> Mhm. Um
they depends a lot on voltage and
frequen- and and and which library you
choose and so on. But, generally, they
you can typically have about like 10 or
20 or 30 of these in in a in a clock
cycle sequentially. So, these primitives
are very very fast, like 10 picoseconds
or something like that. Uh and so, as a
logic designer, I mean, like
[clears throat] in principle, if you
literally just had like um like register
and then AND gate um it kind of in a
loop like that, you could get an
insanely fast clock speed, like more
than four or five six gigahertz or
something like that.
Um
but, if you take this this like really
sort of like simple circuit, um and you
look at the area you're spending here,
like um this is maybe like one I mean,
this is this is called one gate
equivalent um in size, so like unit of
one in area, and this thing is like unit
of eight in area or something like that.
And so, like this is just almo- again,
almost all of your cost is being this
like synchronization or communication
cost compared to the actual logic. And
so, uh
so, this would be a case where you've
gone too far. You've made your clock
speed really really fast at the cost of
spending almost all of your area on reg-
on on on pipeline registers.
Interesting. So, what you're hinting at
is a dynamic where you can have really
fast clock speed, but you're not getting
that much work done. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Um and so you can have like low latency,
but
but low bandwidth.
Or throughput, rather. Yeah. The it
hurts your throughput, in fact, because
like uh like the the throughput of your
chip you can think of as the product of
um how much I can get done per clock
cycle, which is based on this area
efficiency thing, times how many clocks
I get per second.
>> This is this is actually so similar to
the thing we were discussing last time
about like batch size,
um where if you have a low batch size,
then you can anyone user can receive
their
uh next token really fast, but the total
number of tokens that are processed in
say an hour will be kind of lower than
it could otherwise be. Yeah, exactly.
You get you get less parallelism out if
you if you drive your clock speed up
really high.
Language models are starting to compete
against the best human forecasters. I
sat down with two senior Jane Streeters,
Ron Minsky and Dan Pontecorvo, and
asked, "At some point, does AI just do
what Jane Street does?" There's a world
that we should take seriously where, you
know, we're going to build large
language models or some other AI systems
that are like strictly smarter than all
humans on the planet and more capable at
all cognitive tasks. Trading in
particular feels to me as like a kind of
AGI-complete, sort of like NP-complete,
because at the end of the day,
trading involves figuring out what
things are worth, which means making
predictions about the future. Jane
Street isn't betting against AI. They
just signed a $6 million computer chip.
But Ron's view is that the edge keeps
moving. I have never been more desperate
to hire more engineers and more traders
than I am today. You know, you have the
usual thing of like the other hard parts
that we don't yet know how to automate.
Well, that ends up being where the
competitive edge lies. You can find
these open positions and watch the full
interview at janestreet.com/thorkast.
Okay, so I remember talking to um an
FPGA engineer at Jane Street, Clark, um
who actually helped me prep for your the
the previous interview we did together.
And he was explaining why they use FPGAs
and, um,
uh,
I I imagine that for high-frequency
trading,
the throughput is less important than
latency. And so having very specific
control over the clock cycle in a
deterministic way is the most important
thing. I um
Maybe it'd be interesting to talk about
how you
why you can't just achieve that with an
ASIC or why a FPGA is the
uh
Yeah, why you might use an FPGA to
have deterministic clock cycles for like
high-frequency trading. Yeah. So, I
mean, firstly, like, let's consider the
sort of the business case for an FPGA
versus an ASIC. Um
FPGAs and ASICs
use largely the same sort of uh
conceptual model, which is that I have,
um, a series of gates built from ANDs,
ORs, XORs, those like very small
primitives, um, connected together with
a fixed clock cycle, um,
uh, and connected together with wires,
uh, that are running in a fixed clock
cycle. So, anything you can express in
an FPGA, you can express in an ASIC,
too. And it'll be about an order of
magnitude cheaper and and like, uh,
better energy efficiency on an ASIC than
an FPGA.
Uh, the trade-off is that the first FPGA
costs you $10,000, whereas the first
ASIC you make costs you $30,000 because,
uh, because of, uh, it requires an
entire tapeout. So, sort of the business
use case for an FPGA would be that I
want something that has this very
deterministic latency and and and and
fast run time and high parallelism,
uh, but
um
uh, but, you know,
I I I'm going to change it very
frequently. I change what I do every
month or something like that. Uh, and so
that I don't want to pay the tapeout
cost every time.
Now, how does an FPGA actually implement
It's sort of like it emulates the ASIC
programming model,
but in in in a fixed piece of hardware.
And so, how does that work actually?
So,
what it has at the at the base is um
it's got a it's got a um
it's got the two components we just
talked about. It's got these registers
as as uh as storage devices.
And then it's got uh these
these are called LUTs, look-up tables.
Um
uh which actually provide all of the
gates. Mhm.
So, and then and then we're going to see
even the sort of the third component, we
we then have like
sort of a a swarm of these um registers
and LUTs.
Um and all of these are available and
then they're connected by sort of this
big set of um sort of
uh muxes. So, in front of uh every
single one of these we've got uh
something like one of these muxes which
selects one input from everywhere else.
Um
sort of selecting from all of these for
things. Um
you know, we've got a whole bunch of
different options feeding into into into
into all of these things.
So, um
so, what what what this allows is
essentially a
uh when I program my FPGA, I can say
that I'm going to take all of these
components and I'm going to sort of
superimpose on top of this a particular
wiring which like goes through
this LUT and then feeds into this LUT
and then goes to this register and then
feeds into this LUT or something like
that. Mhm.
So, what I've drawn in orange is like
how you like FPGA means field
programmable gate array. This is the the
orange is what has been programmed in
the field, whereas the white is all of
the wires that must exist in the FPGA in
order to actually take to make the
device in the first place. What does it
mean to be programmed in the field? Like
programmed in the field. So, like the
device has been deployed in a data
center, it's sitting in the field and
then you can
come and program Not field as in
electric field, not field as in like out
there in the world field. Okay.
Um and so if I see look at the
how the
the field programming comes out of the
first
lookup table and goes into the second
one.
How is it
How Yeah, how? Like like where where
where are the wires that make that
happen? I guess. Yeah. So I I I got a
little bit like lazy in drawing all of
these Every single device here has a mux
sitting in front of it. Um uh
uh which can select from all of the like
nearby um like uh
circuits that are available. Yeah. Um
And so uh the actual configuration of
the FPGA is like
amounts to it it is the mux control. So
like we in this mux here we have the
data inputs and then we have like the
control that selects. And so like
there's a little storage device sitting
next to every single one of these um
uh muxes saying this is where you're
going to source your input from. Right.
Um and so programming it consists of
like configuring every single one of
these muxes. So that makes sense. What
is happening inside of the lookup table?
Yeah. So the purpose of the lookup
table, so it's going to also have a
little bit of control feeding telling it
what to do as well. The purpose of the
lookup table is to function
to be able to configurably take the role
of an AND gate, OR gate, XOR, any of
those different gates.
So there's many ways you could consider
doing that. Um
the way it is done in sort of
traditional FPGAs is to say um
it will support
So it will be a a lookup table will be
um
it will have four bits of input,
one bit of output.
How many different functions are there
from four to one bit? There are 16
different functions.
Um, and so,
uh, you can actually just tabulate this
as like 16 different like 16 different
numbers. You've got a table of 0111001.
16 entries.
And so, what it does is, um,
this this table is
stored in this blue configuration bit,
um,
and then, uh,
it views these four bits as binary,
looks up the relevant row of the table,
and emits that bit.
So, this is a truth table view of of
lookup tables, essentially. Okay, so the
lookup table, if you think about it an
AND gate, OR gate, NOR gate, XOR gate,
these are all like take as input Those
are like two input functions.
>> Yeah. Uh, so, sometimes we have like
more complicated like a three input
function would be a three-way XOR
>> Right.
>> or a four-way XOR. And in this case, how
many it just depends how how big it is,
but Typical size for LUTs is four input,
um, which is sort of just a sweet spot
between, um,
there's another computer communication
trade-off like here. Like, if it if it
has too few inputs, then you need to use
more LUTs.
>> Yeah.
>> If it if it has too many But, basically,
the lookup table is like a truth table.
It's a truth table, yeah. And with a
truth table, you can program in any gate
you want.
>> That's right.
And so, instead of a lookup table, just
think like a programmable gate. That's
right.
And so, I mean, one of the things you
can do here is you can see why where the
rule of thumb that a FPGA is like an
order of magnitude more expensive than
an ASIC comes from,
um, is to count how many gates would be
inside this lookup table. Yeah.
So, we can view this lookup table
essentially as one of these muxes, um,
and so, it is a mux with has to select
between 16 different values.
Uh, and so, it is a mux with,
uh, sort of
n equals 16, uh, options.
P equals one bits.
And so,
what we saw way earlier is that, um,
it
this circuit costs like n times p many
gates. And so, it's like, um, so it
costs like n times p equals 16 and
gates.
And also 16 ORs. This circuit being the
mux. Uh, yeah, exactly. The mux. The mux
is the core of the
>> The mux that goes into the lookup table.
Uh, so the lookup table itself you can
think of as being actually a big mux
that like selects from all 16 rows down
to one output. Yeah, okay. I see. That
that is the lookup table. But the but
the way you've drawn it here there's
like a mux and then a lookup table.
>> It's it's muxes all the way down. So, I
mean there's a there is a second mux
that is inside here. This mux is is this
mux. Got it. Okay. And then the the
other mux is just saying,
uh, where it came from in this sort of
mess of of of gates.
>> Right. And then the second mux is, okay,
now you have one value, but that value
is still,
um,
still a four-bit value.
Yeah, so I've selected four bits from
the soup.
>> Um, and then and then I use those four
bits to select which entry in the lookup
table
>> Yeah. uh, I'm going to use. Right. Okay.
And it's just like so like, suppose in
the first mux there's like eight nearby
eight you're you're pulling from eight
nearby registers as input.
>> Mhm. Um, [clears throat]
and so that's like a total of like 32
bits going in.
Um, and then out of that
uh, four bits come out. Those four bits
go into the second mux which is inside
the lookup table. So, actually I would
say in yeah, in this case these
registers are single bit registers. So,
if there are eight like eight nearby
registers and lookup tables, then I have
eight bits total coming in in in in
nearby.
I select from eight down to four
different values. So, there's actually
like four different muxes, one
associated
with each of these input like
little mux associated with each of input
bits. Each of them is selecting one out
of eight. And where are those eight
coming from?
Nearby registers and other lots. And
each register is one bit? Yes. Yeah.
And so I guess you AMD or whoever makes
these um
uh FPGAs still has to be opinionated
about
what uh
what registers are connected to which
registers.
Uh and then you can program in the
actual gates, but they added wire in the
connect like the communication topology,
right? Yeah, so there's there's sort of
like you get flexibility
in a local grain thing. There's a sort
of nearby neighborhood where you can
select from.
Um but then more grossly, like more
coarsely, longer distance con-
connections they they form an opinion
on. Yeah.
>> Right.
And the reason it's 10x lower is why? So
if you look at the cost of like building
this lookup table, it's like
32 gates. Yeah.
And then it can give me the equivalent
of like what's one an interesting thing
I can do here. I can do a four-way AND
gate. And so that's like I I'm using 32
gates of lookup table to sort of
implement like a four-way AND means like
what is a four-way AND? I would do like
AND AND and then AND of AND.
So to input like this is a a circuit
that I could implement in an ASIC
directly using these three AND gates.
Um but using a LUT, I can also implement
it, but it's going to take like these 32
gates instead of three.
>> Right.
And so the overhead is really coming
from the uh like um
the fact that the lookup table, the mux
in the lookup table
is
there's a more concise way to describe a
truth table
than listing out every single possible
combination of inputs.
>> Yes.
Uh but which is just to like write out
the gate. Yeah, like to to like place
down the polysilicon and the and the
wires and so on.
>> Interesting.
One important point he made to me is
that the reason they prefer FPGAs to
CPUs is because they get deterministic
clock cycles. They know when a packet
will come in and go out.
Um why is it not a guarantee in CPUs?
Mhm.
So, you can actually design a CPU that
has deterministic latency as well.
Um
uh And in fact, like the the processors
that are inside a lot of AI chips
actually also have deterministic
latency, too. Groq has advertised this.
TPUs have that in the core as well.
Um
The challenge is getting sort of
deterministic latency and high speed at
the same time. And so, um
where does the non-determinism in
latency come from? Um
Non-deterministic latency um comes from
specific design choices in a CPU.
Um
uh It's actually possible to remove
those design choices and make a CPU that
has deterministic latency. Um
Those are not very attractive in the
market, and so people don't make those
CPUs anymore. Um but
but but but actually in some sense, like
uh deterministic latency is maybe a sort
of a simpler designing starting point.
Um and then and then like some chip
designers have added uh things in to to
be non-deterministic. To take a concrete
example of that, um
the probably the most important example
is on a CPU just like the the the uh
the CPU cache itself.
So,
uh
in a CPU, you have the the CPU This is
This is the CPU die itself, and then
there's a memory uh off on the side.
This is the DDR memory um off on the
side. And then you have a cache system
here inside it. This is the cache.
Uh that sort of remembers recent
accesses to DDR and and and and stores
them. And so,
uh when when I'm running through my CPU
instructions, uh every time I uh I have
an instruction that accesses memory, it
first checks in cache uh was was the
data stored in cache, and then if not,
it goes uh fetches out to DDR. Yep.
This is a huge optimization. The cache
is like two orders of magnitude faster
than the DDR. Um if you never
uh if if if you never like use the
cache, like all basically all programs
would run 100 times slower. So, uh the
presence of a cache is absolutely
necessary for a CPU to to run at
reasonable speed. Um
but
whether or not you get a cache hit is
dependent on the sort of ambient
environment of the CPU. Like what other
programs are running, what has run
recently, what is the random number
generator inside the cache system doing,
and so So, that is a big source of
nondeterminism in in the runtime of a
CPU.
>> Yeah.
Um
so this is sort of the memory system for
a CPU.
Um
The The big thing that you can do
differently is uh
instead of having the hardware say, "I'm
going to like read read memory and then
decide the hardware decides whether or
not it comes comes comes from cache or
not." You can actually bake this in this
decision into software.
So, uh a different design philosophy is
is to
um So, and you see this in maybe, for
example, TPUs.
Um the the TPU instead has I mean, I'll
draw the same diagram, but I'll call it
a scratchpad. And so, the the main
difference is um
So, this would be like a TPU, and then a
HBM in this case rather than DDR, but
it's still an off-chip memory.
Um
and instead of like the software saying
first access like memory and then the
hardware decides, um you've got some
instructions that that go here. This is
like one kind of instruction, and then a
totally different kind of instruction
that goes to HBM. Yeah.
And so, this style is is generically
known as scratchpad um
instead of cache. The key distinction
being that you have like one kind of
instruction that says read or write
scratchpad,
and a totally different instruction that
says read or write HPM.
So, is scratchpad being the cache? Yeah,
this this thing here is the is the
scratchpad. Um Just to be clear. So,
stepping way back, people say computers
have the quote unquote John
uh uh uh Von Neumann architecture where
there's this
uh serial processing of information. And
maybe just because we've been talking
about a parallel accelerators, but I
just don't like the FPGA is super
parallel.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
the
AI the kinds of AI accelerator TVUs are
super parallel. Um even CPUs are super
parallel if you think about all the
cores they have. And so, is it actually
like in what sense is modern hardware
actually the Von Neumann architecture?
Is that actually a fair way to describe
modern hardware?
Um I think it's a fair way to describe
CPUs. Like just the amount of
parallelism like on a CPU the amount of
parallelism you get is about 100 cores
times maybe like 16-way vector units.
So, 106 uh about 1,000-way parallelism
on a CPU.
Yeah, I I is it One question is what is
the There is a die that is being used
for the CPU. Mhm. And if there's fewer
threads
just as a matter of like transistor uh
voltages or like switching on and off is
it just that there's like literally one
control flow like a small part of the
die where like voltages are switching on
and off or like
in what How how do you actually occupy
the
die area of a CPU if there's only as
opposed to
>> If there's so few cores like what are
you Am I spending a lot of die in there?
The cores are just much bigger and more
complicated.
Um
so
uh I mean like so I guess we we should
compare like a CPU core which takes up
1/16 1/100 of the die to like I mean to
a lot like a lot is just only these 16
gates. So, like it's clear why there are
so many more lots in an FPGA than cores
in a CPU.
Um
but then sort of maybe the the like why
are there more CUDA cores for example
than than than CPU cores. I think would
be like why a like what's the difference
between a CPU and a GPU or something
like that would would would be a a big
difference.
Um
inside the CPU you have um so one big
use of so the sort of the top unit uses
of area in the side of CPU are the
cache.
Um
very little is actually the ALUs. Um
like mostly it's like these register
files rather than the logic units. Um
and then the
uh
both of these things have equivalents in
in a GPU and so that's not a big
difference. But the thing that does not
have an equivalent in a GPU is the um
sort of this branch predictor. And so
there is a whole big area in the CPU
which is uh
sort of uh just
a whole bunch of predictors that are
saying um when will my next branch be
and where the where's the branch target
for that.
And so uh stripping a lot of that out uh
as as well as sort of making these
register files tighter in in a sense um
is
uh driving a lot of where the like GPU
gains are coming
>> is the purpose of the branch predictor
to like execute both branches at once or
what does it do? So the issue is that
when I've got a series of instructions
like um like
instructions instructions instructions
instructions I
uh if I have a branch like here if this
instruction is branch
um
the the actual processing step of
processing an instruction um
takes a really long amount of time. It
takes like maybe five nanoseconds or
something like that. Um
so like uh the time to actually notice
that I've got a branch and then like
uh
evaluate the boolean whe- whether it's
true and then and then update the
program counter to the new target and
then read from the instruction memory
for that. Um that that could take like
like actually five nanoseconds to to
finish. And so in reality this may
finish somewhere down here.
Um
I don't want to like but like I want to
run a clock speed that is much faster
than what 5 nanoseconds allows. Like
like 5 nanoseconds is 200 MHz clock
speed. I would like to run at 1 or 2 GHz
or something like that. And so
um
I need to run other instructions while
the branch is is being evaluated.
And so I
like I really just want to keep running
the following instructions that happen
after me.
Um but that might have been wrong. Like
if the branch ended up being taken, then
I need to know that instead of it
evaluating these instructions, I
actually need to like jump to wherever
the target is and and run run these
instructions instead.
And so the purpose of the branch
predictor is like like genuinely to
predict based on like before you even
get to this instruction to be like five
cycles earlier to predict there was
going to be a branch that's going to
happen. So if I think about how the
brain works versus what you're
describing here at a high level, the
differences might be that
while you can do structured sparsity in
these accelerators and then save
yourself some
um
area that you would have otherwise had
to dedicate to these gates, in the brain
there's unstructured sparsity. You know,
any neuron can connect to any other
neuron and not in like ways where they
have the column lined or whatever.
>> Yeah. Um
then there's the fact that memory and
computer co-located. I guess you could
say in a way the memory and computer
co-located on This this is exactly the
co-location in some sense of the memory
and computer.
>> That's right.
Yeah, so maybe maybe that actually isn't
a big difference. And the other maybe a
big
a big difference is that the clock cycle
on the brain is much slower
than on
um
on computers.
And partly that's to preserve energy
because the faster the clock cycle, the
bigger the voltage
uh needs to be in order to
identify
uh for the signal to settle and to like
identify what state a transistor is in.
>> right. That's right.
I don't know if you have other
high-level takes about like how
any commentary on what you know, what
the brain might be doing versus how
these chips work. Yeah, I mean, so so
let's take the clock speed one first
actually. Yeah. Um
the
clock speed is quite high on on a chip
because that I mean drives higher
throughput. Um
like
when we compare a like a GPU running
some some workload, it's running batch
size 1,000 or something like that.
Whereas like the brain is not running
batch size 1,000. There's only one of
me. And so you could sort of imagine
saying we'll take a GPU and like instead
of running at a gigahertz run at a
megahertz or something like that. And
and that would start to look maybe a
little bit more like like um
sort of equivalent things that you're
talking about in the brain.
Um
There is
in the way that silicon works, um
there are
like that does not give you an 1,000 x
advantage in energy efficiency.
So
um
what it ends up looking like is you can
uh like you sort of just end up running
the circuit once to stabilization and
then it'll sit idle for a long period of
time.
Um it doesn't consume a lot of energy
while it's sitting idle because uh most
of the energy is consumed in in sort of
toggling uh bits from zero to one and
back. Um
uh
So actually let's let's talk about the
energy consumption uh of of a circuit
like this.
The way to think of uh a bit being
stored is you've actually deposited some
charge in in a capacitor somewhere
sitting somewhere in in the chip uh
implicitly. So it becomes charged when
it is um bit becomes a one and then it
becomes discharged when it next goes to
a zero. Um and that cycle of like
charging the capacitor and then dumping
that charge out to ground, that is where
the energy is consumed. Yeah. This is
called the dynamic or switching power uh
This is most of the energy consumption
of a chip. There is some other energy
consumption just coming from the fact
that
um
insulators aren't perfect insulators,
but we'll just discard that. Most of the
energy consumption actually comes from
just the charging and discharging of
like toggling from zero to one and and
back to zero.
>> Right. Um so if you run a chip much
slower and you only clock it once every
thousand clock cycles or something, you
will have a thousand times fewer
transitions. It'll be about a thousand
times less energy consumption. Um but
but like but not a substantial advantage
in energy efficiency. Um okay, so you
described how a TPU works at a high
level.
Um what is the difference
at a high level between how a GPU and a
TPU work?
Yeah, so I mean I think there's sort of
a
high-level organization principle that
is different. Um
and then there's sort of inside the
cores what are different. But we'll look
at sort of
outside the like at the high level. Um
so we'll take a GPU
um
and a TPU and what does like sort of the
top-level block structure look like? Um
if you think of this as the whole chip
um in each case um
the organization of of the GPU um
uh is mostly a bunch of uh almost
identical units which are these
um these are the SMs.
Um and then they've got a an L2 memory
in the middle and then a bunch more of
these SMs on the bottom.
Um
and so
uh there's sort of this fairly regular
grid of cores. Um
uh and then like if we look at a at a
TPU in
in comparison, um you you uh
you end up with much coarser grained
units of
logic and so you you end up with
something like um
some large number of
um maybe like maybe just a few
matrix units. These are the
um
These are the big like systolic arrays.
And then in the middle you've got some
vector unit.
And then you've got your um matrix units
at the bottom. So um
Now sort of like matrix units with a
vector unit in the middle sort of this
is the whole TPU chip. You can sort of
think of scaling this thing down into a
really tiny unit with a smaller matrix
unit, smaller vector unit. And that is
sort of what a an SM is. So sort of at a
very high-level point of view, the
the GPU has a lot of tiny tiny TPUs um
sort of tiled across the whole Oh,
interesting. So like you're suggesting
the Tensor Core within a streaming SM is
analogous to an MXU. Yeah, it's very
very similar. Yeah. I see. And so if you
had more like
more lack of structure, having a bunch
of tiny TPUs makes a lot of sense.
Whereas if you kind of just have like
huge matrix multiplications,
you're like why don't we just
why don't we avoid the co- the cost of
having the individual SMs with their own
registers and work schedulers and things
like that. Why don't we just like make a
huge thing and like amortize those costs
across the whole thing. And I mean I
think this shows up in how large you can
grow things. We've we've sort of seen
this theme like especially with the
systolic array where larger systolic
array amortizes the register file costs
better. Yeah.
>> Um this sort of design allows you to
have larger systolic arrays. This
whereas the sort of GPU design
constrains you to having small units of
everything.
Um
There's a trade-off, however. Um
the
There ends up being um because of this
sort of coarse-grained separation of
things, there you need to move a lot of
data from the vector unit to the matrix
units. Um and so like you need to move a
lot of data through through
a sort of uh
like two two lines of perimeter here.
Um whereas if you sort of look at the
equivalent thing here, you've got vector
units everywhere, and you need to move
data through this line, through this
line, through this line, through this
line. So, the amount of data you can
move between a vector unit and matrix
unit is actually much higher in in a GPU
than in a in a TPU because
because like it's like instead of having
to like move all the data through these
just two lines, you're moving all these
data through like 16 lines or something
of of of of wiring instead in a GPU.
Right, but also you you might have to
move
across less area.
Which I mean is also a saving. Like it's
an energy saving as well. So, so data
ends up moving like if you can operate
entirely within a an SM, the data
movement is much smaller. But then the
moment you want to operate across SMs,
like it it becomes sort of more more
complicated and expensive. So, you don't
have a comment, but one might expect
that a thing in Matrox might try to do
is to get the GPU-like smaller structure
of um systolic arrays surrounded by um
SRAM, but also at the same time make it
so that like the
things you need in an SM to support the
CUDA architecture uh
but take a bunch of bunch of space, you
might discard.
Yeah. Um
We've talked publicly about something
which we call a splittable systolic
array, which is sort of in in some sense
you can think of it as like big systolic
arrays that can be small systolic arrays
as well. Cool.
Um okay, I think this is a good note to
close on. Ritesh, thank you so much.
Thanks, Ritesh.